© 2025 KPMG Advisory Services, a partnership registered in Nigeria and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a 
private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
The Nigeria T ax 
Act1 (NT A), 2025
Issue No. 8.2 | August 2024
The Nigeria Tax Act (NTA or “the Act”) repeals certain existing tax laws and consolidates the legal framework 
governing taxation in the country into a single legislation for simplicity and improved tax administration. 
Consolidating tax provisions into one single document will also help to eliminate overlapping, conflicting or 
ambiguous provisions that can result in unnecessary complexity and uncertainty. It will, therefore, help to 
provide a clear and comprehensive view of tax laws in the country and enhance transparency.    
The overarching objective of the Act is to streamline Nigeria’s tax system by reducing the number of taxes 
to a manageable single-digit figure. This reform is aimed at enhancing revenue generation, simplifying 
compliance procedures, and addressing regional disparities in tax administration. 
A major thrust of the reform is the elimination of nuisance taxes - those that yield minimal revenue, are 
costly to administer, and disproportionately affect the poor and small businesses. The focus will now shift to 
high-yielding and broad-based taxes that are relatively easy to collect. The Act also seeks to merge taxes and 
levies imposed on the same or substantially similar tax bases to reduce duplication and inefficiency.
To ensure long-term impact, the Act aims to institutionalise tax harmonisation efforts; thereby ensuring that 
the simplified structure is sustainable across all levels of government. While the reform has been praised for 
its potential to modernise Nigeria’s tax landscape, it has also sparked diverse reactions regarding its possible 
economic and social consequences.
As majority of the provisions of the existing tax laws are retained in the consolidated Act, this Newsletter 
will focus on the key changes, their implications for businesses and our recommendations for enhancing their 
effectiveness to make them align better with global best practices.
Key Changes to Existing T ax Laws
The Act provides that income tax will be imposed on the 
profits or gains of any company (including chargeable 
gains2 hitherto chargeable under the erstwhile Capital 
Gains Tax Act), income of any individual and income 
arising, accruing or due to a trustee or an estate. Under 
the Act, a company can be charged to tax in its own 
name, principal officer, representative, receiver, liquidator 
or administrator. The other key changes include:  
1. Clarity in transactions liable to income tax: The 
NTA explicitly states that prizes, winnings, honoraria, 
grants, awards, profits or gains from transactions 
in digital or virtual assets are chargeable to tax. 
However, losses incurred from transactions in digital 
assets would only be deductible from the profits 
from digital assets business. 
 
The taxation of digital assets will pose some 
challenges, and the tax authorities need to rise to 
these challenges.  One obvious challenge is how to 
correctly value digital assets for tax purposes given 
market volatilities. In addition, the National Revenue 
Service (NRS) may struggle to track digital asset 
transactions and enforce reporting requirements 
since these assets can be held in a manner that may 
make it difficult to identify the true owner. This is 
where international coordination will prove invaluable. 
2. Broadening of the definition of interest: Interest 
is defined to include penal interest, foreign exchange 
difference arising in relation to securities, payment in 
relation to derivatives or similar payment. 
3. Expansion of definition of dividend: The definition 
of dividend for a liquidating company has been 
expanded to include distributions of a capital nature, 
which were excluded under the erstwhile Companies 
Income Tax Act (CITA). 
4. Introduction of the definition of royalty: Definition 
of “royalty” encompasses any payments of any 
kind received or receivable, paid or payable as a 
1     Please note that as of the time of publishing this newsletter, the President has not signed the bill into law.
2     Chargeable gains will be computed as the difference between net proceeds and tax written down value.
© 2025 KPMG Advisory Services, a partnership registered in Nigeria and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a 
private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
consideration for the use of, or the right to use or 
exploit any property. Companies should review their 
royalty agreements to assess their tax footprints.
5. Taxation of a Nigerian company: The significant 
changes in this area include:
i. Introduction of Controlled Foreign 
Corporation (CFC) rules: The NTA introduces 
CFC rules to counter profit shifting. Where 
a foreign subsidiary of a Nigerian company 
retains profits that could have been distributed 
without adversely affecting its operations, those 
profits will be deemed distributed and taxed in 
Nigeria. This eliminates the deferral advantage 
sometimes used in tax planning and strengthens 
Nigeria’s ability to tax offshore profits that 
economically belong to Nigerian entities.
ii. Anti-base erosion through minimum Effective 
Tax Rate (ETR): The NTA also adopts a top-up 
tax mechanism aligned with the OECD’s BEPS 
Pillar 2 framework. If a foreign subsidiary of a 
Nigerian company (or a group member) pays less 
than the minimum ETR of 15%, the Nigerian 
parent must pay the shortfall. This provision 
discourages the use of low-tax jurisdictions for 
profit shifting and ensures a fairer allocation of 
taxing rights to Nigeria.
These measures enhance the robustness of Nigeria’s 
tax system by addressing tax avoidance strategies, 
protecting the domestic tax base, and aligning with 
international best practices on BEPS.
6. Taxation of Non-Resident Persons (NRPs): In 
determining the total profits, only expenses incurred 
in producing the profits attributable to the permanent 
establishment in Nigeria will qualify for deduction. 
However, no deduction will be allowed in respect of 
royalty, fees, or similar payments in return for the use 
of patents or other rights. Where the total profits of a 
NRP cannot be ascertained, the NRS shall apply the 
applicable profit margin to the total income generated 
from Nigeria. However, the tax payable by any NRC 
will not be less than the tax withheld at source. If the 
NRC does not have any income liable to withholding 
tax, the tax payable shall not be less than 4% of 
the total income generated from Nigeria. The profit 
(based on earnings before interest and tax) shall be 
established from the published financial statements. 
However, where the financial statements are not 
available, the NRS shall determine the profit margin 
based on that of a comparable company.
7. General principles for tax deductibility: Section 
20 of the NTA outlines the types of expenses that 
may be deducted when determining taxable profit. 
Subsection (1) specifically states that such expenses 
must be “wholly and exclusively incurred in the 
production of income” to qualify for deduction. The 
erstwhile additional principles of ‘reasonably’ and 
‘necessarily’ incurred are no longer applicable. The 
elimination of these 2 principles will greatly help 
in managing disputes and controversies between 
taxpayers and tax authorities that often result from 
whether an expense is reasonable and or necessary. 
Also, Section 20 (4) states that an expense incurred 
in a currency other than the naira may only be 
deducted to the extent of its naira equivalent at the 
official exchange rate published by the Central Bank 
of Nigeria (CBN) for the relevant date or period. We 
do not believe that this is necessary given that the 
CBN has implemented a tracking and monitoring 
initiative to discourage speculative bidding, and it 
seems to be working. If there is inadequate supply 
of foreign exchange, businesses will have no choice 
but to resort to alternative means of sourcing 
foreign exchange. The NRS should only focus on 
substantiating the payments made in respect of forex 
transactions.
The NTA also provides, in Section 21 (p), that any 
expense on which VAT has not been charged or the 
relevant duty paid will not qualify for tax deduction.
8. Proration of capital allowances: Capital allowances 
will only be prorated where the non-taxable income 
constitutes 10% or more of the total income of a 
company. It should be noted that only straight-line 
allowances are now applicable.  Initial allowances 
have been eliminated.

© 2025 KPMG Advisory Services, a partnership registered in Nigeria and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a 
private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
9. Introduction of rent relief: The NTA eliminates the 
Consolidated Relief Allowance (CRA) and introduces 
a rent relief under Section 30(vi), which is 20% of 
annual rent paid, subject to a maximum of ₦500,000, 
whichever is lower. However, to claim this relief, 
declarations must be made regarding the actual 
rent paid, and the tax authority has the right to 
request additional relevant information. The takeaway 
from this is that individuals that live in their own 
accommodation cannot claim such relief.  This begs 
the question of why the CRA has not been retained.
10. Chargeable gains and assets: According to Section 
34 of the NTA, chargeable assets include all types 
of property, including shares, options, rights, debts, 
digital assets, intangible property, and foreign 
currencies. However, gains from selling shares in 
Nigerian companies are not taxable if:
• the sale proceeds are less than ₦150 million, and 
the chargeable gain does not exceed ₦10 million 
within 12 consecutive months
• the shares are transferred between approved 
parties in a regulated Securities Lending 
Transaction.
• the proceeds from disposal are reinvested within 
the same assessment year in shares of Nigerian 
companies. However, the portion not reinvested 
will be taxed.
11. Rates of tax for companies: Section 56 of the Act 
stipulates that small companies (companies that 
earn gross turnover of ₦100m or less per annum 
and with total fixed assets not exceeding ₦250m) 
and large companies be subjected to tax at 0% and 
30% respectively. The 30% rate for large companies 
can be reduced to 25% effective from a date as may 
be determined in an Order issued by the President on 
the advice of the National Economic Council.
12. Effective Tax Rate (ETR): Section 57 of the NTA 
introduces an ETR of 15% of net income of a 
company. The NTA defines net income as the profits 
before tax as reported in the Audited Financial 
Statements (AFS) excluding franked investment 
income and unrealised gains and losses.
This provision applies to companies with turnover 
exceeding ₦50 billion, and companies that are part 
of a multinational enterprise (MNE) group with an 
aggregate turnover of at least €750 million or its 
equivalent. This 15% ETR aligns with the OECD 
Pillar II framework, which mandates a top-up tax to 
ensure that large multinational groups with a turnover 
exceeding €750 million or its equivalent pay tax at 
an ETR of 15% on the income generated in each 
jurisdiction they operate in. 
The provision specifies that, for the purpose of a 
life insurance company, the net income will not 
include gross income and investment income for 
policyholders. The ETR provisions will not apply to 
licensed entities within the free trade zones except 
with respect to sales within the customs territory 
or if the entity is a member of an MNE group with 
an aggregate turnover of at least €750 million or its 
equivalent. 
13. Rates of tax for individuals: Section 58 of the Act 
introduces a tax-exempt threshold of N800,000 and 
increases tax rates for high income earners. The 
new tax rates range from 0% to 25%. The Fourth 
Schedule of the Act, reproduced in the table below, 
shows the tax bands and rates: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The revised structure introduces a more progressive 
tax system by providing significant relief to low-
income earners and ensuring that higher income 
earners contribute a larger share of their income.
14. Introduction of a development levy: Section 
59 of the NTA consolidates other taxes and levies 
currently being paid by companies (such as Tertiary 
Education Tax, Nigeria Police Trust Fund, National 
Information Technology Development Agency (NITDA) 
Levy, National Agency for Science and Engineering 
Infrastructure (NASENI), etc.). The provision levies 
a flat rate of 4% on companies’ (other than small 
companies and non-resident companies) assessable 
profit. This tax is also not imposed on assessable 
profits calculated for hydrocarbon tax purposes.
15. Taxation of approved entities in free trade zones: 
Section 60 and the Second Schedule of the Act 
provide that the profits of an entity operating within 
an Export Processing Zone (EPZ) are exempt from 
tax, subject to certain conditions. The exemption 
applies where:
• All the entity’s total sales arise from the export of 
goods or services, or from the supply of inputs 
used exclusively in the production of goods or 
services for export;
• No more than 25% of the entity’s total sales are 
made to the customs territory in Nigeria; and
• Any such sales to the customs territory are made 
to persons engaged in upstream, midstream, or 
downstream petroleum or gas operations.
Where more than 25% of the sales are to the 
customs territory, tax will be applicable on the 
profits of the entity in respect of its total sales to the 
customs territory. However, effective from 1 January 
2028, an entity will be fully liable to tax in respect 
of sales to the customs territory regardless of the 
percentage of the sales.
Proposed Tax Band Proposed Rate
First N800,000 0%
Next N2,200,000 15%
Next N9,000,000 18%
Next N13,000,000 21%
Next N25,000,000 23%
Above N50,000,000 25%
© 2025 KPMG Advisory Services, a partnership registered in Nigeria and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a 
private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
16. Input VAT claim: The scope of recoverable input 
VAT has been broadened to include VAT incurred 
on services and fixed assets, provided that such 
supplies are consumed, utilised, or supplied while 
making taxable supplies. 
17. Fiscalisation of supplies for VAT: Section 157 of 
the NTA mandates taxable persons to implement 
the fiscal tools that may be deployed by the tax 
authority, which may include electronic devices, 
software solutions, for electronic invoicing and data 
transfer. Section 23 of the Nigeria Tax Administration 
Act mandates any person making taxable supplies 
to adopt any Electronic Fiscal System (EFS) for 
recording and reporting transactions when the NRS 
implements such a system. A notable example of the 
EFS that has been introduced by the NRS is the VAT 
automation and e-invoicing system. 
18. Obligation to stamp and pay related duty: Section 
125 requires the transferee of an interest in real 
property, the beneficiary of a service for which 
consideration was paid, or any other person taking 
security in a transaction for which an instrument is 
executed, to stamp the related instrument within 30 
days of its execution and to pay the duty applicable 
to the transaction. This will go a long way in resolving 
the issue of who is responsible for the payment of 
duty in certain instances.
19. Stamp duty on loan capital: Section 136 provides 
that the loan capital of any company will be liable to 
ad valorem tax. The NTA has defined loan capital to 
include debenture stock, other stock or funded debt 
whatever name known, or any debt raised by any 
corporation, company or body of persons formed 
or established in Nigeria but excluding an overdraft, 
loan obtained for a period not exceeding 12 months. 
The key takeaway from this is that any loan with a 
duration of more than 12 months will now be subject 
to stamp duty.
20. Imposition of surcharge: Section 158 imposes a 
5% surcharge on chargeable fossil fuel products 
provided or produced in Nigeria and this shall be 
collected at the time a chargeable transaction occurs. 
The computation shall be based on the retail price 
while the NRS will collect the surcharge monthly.  
However, the surcharge will not apply to clean or 
renewable products, household kerosene, cooking 
gas (LPG) and compressed natural gas (CNG).
21. Tax incentives: The Act introduces several tax 
incentives, such as:
• Income generated by companies engaged 
in agricultural businesses, including crop 
production, livestock, aquaculture, forestry, 
dairy, cocoa processing and manufacturing of 
animal feeds will be exempt from income tax for 
the first five (5) years from commencement of 
business.
• A company will be entitled to an additional 
deduction of 50% in the relevant years of 
assessment in respect of costs incurred in any 2 
calendar years from 2023 to 2025 with respect 
to the following:
• wage awards, salary increases, 
transportation allowance or transport subsidy 
granted to a low-income worker that bring 
the gross remuneration of such worker to an 
amount not exceeding ₦100,000. However, 
any award or salary increase to any worker 
earning above ₦100,000 shall not qualify.
• salaries of any new employees that 
constitute a net increase in the average 
number of new employees hired in 2023 
and 2024 calendar years over and above 
the average net employment in the three 
(3) preceding years, provided that such new 
employees are not involuntarily disengaged 
within a period of 3 years post-employment. 
Net employment is defined as the total 
number of persons employed less the total 
number of persons disengaged during the 
calendar year, irrespective of whether the 
disengagement is voluntary or not.
Other incentives include:
• Deduction for research and development: The 
deduction to be allowed under Section 164 of the 
NTA has now been adjusted to 5% of a company’s 
turnover for the year. This represents a significant 
deviation from the provision under CITA, which 
allowed a deduction of 10% of total profits. The 
implication is that companies now have a broader 
base of 5% of turnover, as opposed to total profits, 
from which they can commit funds to research and 
development activities. The NTA also provides that 
where a company that has enjoyed this deduction 
transfers or sells the outcome of the research and 
development to another person, the proceeds from 
the sale or transfer shall be taxable.
• Economic Development Incentive (EDI): The NTA 
repeals the Industrial Development Act and replaces 
the Pioneer Status Incentive (PSI) with the EDI 
under Part II of Chapter 8 of the NTA. The scheme 
introduces a targeted incentive regime aimed at 
stimulating capital investment in defined priority 
sectors. To qualify for this incentive, the Qualifying 
Capital Expenditure (QCE) to be incurred by the 
company on or before production day (i.e. the date 

© 2025 KPMG Advisory Services, a partnership registered in Nigeria and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a 
private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
commercial production commences) must meet the 
minimum investment threshold as outlined by sector-
specific thresholds in the Ninth Schedule. 
The list of priority sectors is like the PSI list 
with some notable inclusions such as the 
manufacture of renewable energy equipment, 
while telecommunications and e-commerce have 
been excluded, reflecting government views on 
their maturity. Sector-specific minimum investment 
thresholds and sunset periods now apply, making the 
regime more performance-driven. The previous rule 
requiring PSI applications to be submitted within one 
year of commercial production has been removed 
and replaced with a focus on prioritising the scale 
and commitment to invest in QCE prior to or on the 
production day. Applications can be made by existing 
companies or promoters of proposed companies 
(not yet incorporated) to foster timely submissions. 
However, where approval is granted to a proposed 
company, incorporation must occur within three 
months of the approval notice.
The Nigerian Investment Promotion Commission 
(NIPC) is specifically designated to receive 
applications and submit recommendations, including 
a projected tax expenditure impact, to the Minister 
of Industry, Trade and Investment. This is to ensure 
a structured and transparent application process. 
Following the NIPC’s recommendation, the Minister 
is to seek Presidential approval, which is now 
explicitly required under the Act. While this structure 
promotes accountability, requiring Presidential sign-
off on each application may introduce bureaucratic 
delays.
The NTA also replaces the complex and costly 
fee structure3 under the PSI regime with a more 
equitable model of 0.1% fee on QCE, capped 
at ₦5million payable each to the NIPC and the 
Industrial Inspectorate Department (IID). In essence, 
the maximum fee payable to the NIPC and IID is 
₦10million. 
Eligible companies are issued Economic 
Development Tax Credit (EDTC) of 5% per annum on 
each QCE acquired during the 5-year priority period, 
effective from the production date. The EDTC can 
be used to offset the tax payable for any year of 
assessment during the priority period, excluding ETR 
adjustments. Unused EDTC can be carried forward 
for a maximum of an additional 5 years, after which it 
will lapse.
The introduction of the EDTC marks a fundamental 
change to how PSI regime was structured. While the 
PSI offered a full income tax exemption during the 
pioneer period, the EDTC introduced a more limited 
and targeted incentive. This pivot reflects a move 
from blanket tax holidays to a performance-based 
incentive model linked to actual capital investment 
and economic activity.
Some of the key differences in the structure of the 2 schemes include the following:
S/N Indicator EDI (NTA) PSI (IDA)
1) Corporate Tax Treatment Subject to CIT at 30%. Full CIT exemption on PSI activities 
during pioneer period
2) Capital allowance Claim capital allowance on QCE during 
the incentive period, supported by a 
certificate of acceptance issued by the 
IID. 
Deferred until post -pioneer period. 
3) Tax losses Can be utilised during the incentive 
period subject to conditions. 
Net loss (aggregate of loss and profit) 
can be carried forward to post pioneer 
period.
4) Development Levy/
Tertiary Education Tax
EDI companies are liable to 
development levy. 
PSI companies are exempt from 
Tertiary Education Tax.
5) WHT deduction on 
income
EDI companies’ income may be 
exposed to WHT deduction on the 
basis that EDI companies are taxable, 
although eligible for EDIC. The WHT 
regulations specify that any payment 
in respect of profit that is exempt from 
income tax is exempt from WHT .
The potential WHT deductions could 
significantly affect the cash flow.
PSI companies’ income is exempt 
from the deduction of WHT .
6) Dividend distribution Subject to WHT . Exempt from WHT subject to 
conditions.
3     Registration: ₦150,000
• Application: ₦500,000
• Due diligence: ₦1,000,000
• Service charge deposit: ₦3,000,000
• Annual service charge: 1 .5% of actual pioneer profits
© 2025 KPMG Advisory Services, a partnership registered in Nigeria and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a 
private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
The restructured EDI framework is expected to enhance 
transparency around tax expenditures and revenue 
forgone. Companies will need to conduct a cost benefit 
analysis, particularly in relation to their planned capital 
expenditure investments.
Section 170(3) of the NTA provides for a one-time five-
year extension of the EDI certificate, bringing the total 
incentive period to a maximum of 10 years, on the 
condition that the company reinvests 100 percent of 
the profits earned during the initial incentive period into 
the expansion of the same product(s). However, the Act 
does not state whether the 5% credit will apply during 
this extended period. Given that the tax credit is the 
only benefit that accrues to priority sector companies, it 
seems reasonable to expect that it will apply during the 
extension period. However, this needs to be clarified to 
avoid unnecessary dispute.
This provision appears to support expansion projects 
undertaken by existing Economic Development Incentive 
Certificate (EDIC) beneficiaries for the purpose of EDIC 
extension, to the exclusion of non-EDIC brownfield 
expansion projects. Therefore, the previous requirement 
to route applications to the President for preliminary 
review and approval for this category of expansion 
projects may continue though it may potentially introduce 
bureaucratic delays.
Other notable points under the EDI include:
• Production day & QCE: Section 172 of the NTA 
defines production day and QCE. These provisions 
are critical in determining the commencement of the 
EDI and the quantum of capital investments eligible 
for tax credits. The Section prescribes clear timelines 
for submitting applications. Notably, IID is mandated 
to issue a certificate within 14 days of inspecting the 
relevant assets, certifying QCE incurred prior to the 
production day and during the priority period.
The inclusion of a 14-day issuance timeline is 
commendable and mirrors Executive Order 001, 
which allows applicants to escalate to the Minister 
for the issuance of any certificate, in evidence of 
grant, within 14 days of lapse of the MDA ’s stipulated 
timeline.
The pre-production certification is crucial, as only 
verified capital investments count towards meeting 
the minimum investment threshold required to retain 
the EDIC. Failure to meet this threshold could result 
in revocation of the EDIC. Proper certification can 
unlock significant tax credits.
However, there appears to be a potential conflict 
in the responsible authority for issuing the QCE 
certificate. While Section 172(3) requires companies 
to apply to the Service to certify the QCE incurred 
pre-production day, Section 172(6) transfers the 
responsibility for issuing the certificate to the IID. 
Under the PSI regime, this function resides with the 
FIRS. It will be important for this discrepancy to be 
clarified to avoid disputes between the authorities.
• Record-keeping: The NTA mandates separate record 
keeping for priority and non-priority operations, 
audited independently. Failure to comply will result in 
all income being treated as non-priority, disqualifying 
the company from tax credits. In addition to annual 
tax returns, there is a requirement to submit annual 
tax incentives returns to the relevant tax authority in 
the form prescribed by the Service covering income 
tax and any incentive other than those that are 
generally available.
• Transitional provisions & anti-avoidance: 
Section 184 prohibits double-dipping as companies 
granted the EDTC are barred from accessing similar 
incentives under any other law. However, businesses 
currently benefiting from the PSI may continue for 
the remainder of their approved period. Likewise, 
EDI benefits granted before a sector’s sunset date 
remain valid until expiry.
• Sunset clause: The NTA introduces a “sunset” 
mechanism setting a definitive end date after 
which a sector or activity will no longer qualify for 
EDI, ensuring periodic review and relevance of 
tax incentives. This is a significant improvement, 
as the absence of definite timelines under the 
previous regime led to uncertainty. While the former 
framework allowed for periodic review and deletion 
from the PSI list (i.e., manufacture of cement), the 
processes for these were sometimes unclear.
• Rescoping the VAT exempt and zero-rated 
supplies in Nigeria: Sections 185 to 187 of the 
Act outline the items that constitute exempt 
supplies and taxable supplies chargeable at the 
rate of zero percent4. (Please refer to the stated 
sections for the full list of items). 
• Explicit provision for tax asset transfer: 
Section 189 of the NTA allows for the transfer of 
unutilised capital allowances, unabsorbed losses, 
and unutilised withholding tax credits from 
merging entities to the surviving entity in the 
event of a merger. Unutilised capital allowances 
shall be available for use by the surviving entity. 
 
Commentary
Tax reforms are essential for several reasons, such 
as revenue generation, simplification and efficiency, 
fairness and equity, economic growth, improved 
tax administration, adaptation to evolving economic 
conditions, and the need to combat tax evasion and 
avoidance. It must be noted that consolidating tax 
provisions into one single legislation promotes coherence 
and consistency in tax policy, thereby reducing the 
risk of unintended consequences and enhancing tax 
administration. 
The decision to repeal the payment of minimum tax 
by loss-making companies should be applauded. The 
erstwhile provision amounts to double jeopardy for such 
companies. Bad times could adversely affect the fortunes 
of a business. It would, therefore, be punitive to charge 
4     *Zero-rated supplies are goods, services and incorporeal properties that are subject to VAT at a rate of 0% instead of 7 .5%. While VAT -exempt supplies are goods, services or incorporeal 
properties that are not subject to VAT . Taxpayers can recover the input VAT they incur on their purchases against their zero-rated supplies but cannot do same for exempt supplies. 
© 2025 KPMG Advisory Services, a partnership registered in Nigeria and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a 
private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
the affected companies to tax in the circumstances 
as this would have to be paid from their capital in the 
absence of profits. In this regard, we commend the 
authorities for their ongoing efforts to enhance the 
efficiency of tax administration in the country.
Overall, the NTA appears to have significantly broadened 
the tax base to ensure that a wider range of economic 
and business activities are brought within the tax 
net. This expansion may lead to some increase in the 
government’s tax revenue. However, it is doubtful how 
significant the impact on government revenue will be 
given some of the incentives in the Act. Only time will 
tell. 
However, certain potential concerns still arise from the 
provisions of the Act and these need to be addressed:
• Forex Challenges: Section 20(4) states that 
expenses incurred in a currency other than the naira 
may only be deducted to the extent of its naira 
equivalent at the official exchange rate published 
by the CBN. This implies that where a business 
buys forex at a rate that is higher than the official 
rate, such company cannot claim tax deduction 
for the difference in value between the official 
and the other rates. The intention is to discourage 
speculative foreign exchange transactions and 
encourage the appreciation of the naira. However, 
issues surrounding the accessibility of all forex 
needs due to supply problems have not been 
considered. Companies are forced to buy forex 
from other sources that sell at rates higher than the 
official rates. This is done in a bid to sustain their 
businesses. This provision appears to be a penalty 
for businesses that simply want to keep operations 
going. If the CBN could meet all forex needs, no 
one would need to go to other sources. With the 
current state of the economy, focus should be on 
improving liquidity and introducing stricter reporting 
requirements to track and monitor foreign exchange 
transactions. The electronic monitoring and tracking 
system recently introduced by the CBN should 
be commended and given sufficient time to work. 
It is also important that there should be effective 
coordination between the monetary and fiscal 
policies.
• Expenses on which VAT is Due but was not 
Charged will not Qualify as an Allowable 
Deduction: Section 21 of the NTA lists items that 
do not qualify as allowable deductions. Section 
21 (p) includes expenses on which VAT has not 
been charged. This means that such expenses will 
not be considered allowable tax deductions even 
when those expenses have been validly incurred 
for business purposes. This implies that a company 
could be held accountable for any inaction or non-
performance by its suppliers or service providers. 
While the defaulting service providers may eventually 
be required to pay the VAT during an audit or 
investigation, the company will have already been 
denied the ability to claim a deduction for the related 
expense.
• Introduction of Development Levy (DL): One major 
drawback with the introduction of the levy is that 
certain categories of companies that were previously 
exempt from payment of some of the separate 
earmarked taxes by virtue of the nature of their 
businesses are now liable to pay the DL, subject to 
the exemptions listed in point 14 above. For example, 
the NASENI levy only applied to the profit before 
tax (PBT) of commercial companies and firms with 
a turnover of ₦100,000,000 and above, covering the 
banking, mobile telecommunication, ICT , aviation, 
maritime, oil and gas sectors. However, the DL, 
which includes the NASENI levy, is now payable by 
all companies other than small companies and non-
resident companies.
• Rent Relief Versus Economic (Rent) Reality: The 
figure/rate proposed does not reflect the reality 
of the current economic climate in Nigeria and its 
effects on housing. This is considering rental prices in 

© 2025 KPMG Advisory Services, a partnership registered in Nigeria and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a 
private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
major cities, including Lagos and Abuja, where rent is 
usually significantly higher, and formal employment is 
predominant. 
There are some aspects of the rent relief scheme 
that require clarification on the modalities for 
application.
For instance:
• Given that rent may be paid at different dates 
in ‘a year’, on what basis would the rent relief 
be computed? For example, what portion of the 
annual rent would be granted as relief for rent 
paid in the month of May for a particular year?
• Would homeowners claim the relief?
• Do employees require the relevant tax authority’s 
approval before claiming the relief?
• Fiscalisation of VAT: Although the fiscalisation 
requirement is expected to enhance VAT compliance 
and reduce tax evasion, the proposed fiscalisation 
system raises concerns on cybersecurity threats, 
data protection and privacy, compliance and 
associated costs to taxpayers, etc., if not properly 
checked/managed. The tax authorities will need 
to provide robust security measures to ensure 
taxpayers’ confidence, regular training and orientation 
of taxpayers. Most importantly, there should be 
flexible compliance options to minimise financial 
and operational burdens on taxpayers. The policy 
may present challenges for small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs), which may then need 
to purchase ERPs (if they don’t have one already) 
that will seamlessly plug into the EFS of the tax 
authorities. The purchase of these ERPs may require 
a significant capital outlay from these SMEs. It is, 
therefore, important that, in designing an EFS, the 
tax authorities adapt the EFS to easily plug into the 
ERPs common to both big and small businesses.
• VAT Payment with Subsequent Refund Process: 
A person whose supplies are taxed at a 0% VAT rate 
must still pay VAT on any taxable goods or services 
used in producing those supplies. They can later 
request a refund for the VAT they have paid. The 
process can create cash flow issues, particularly 
for small businesses that may struggle with the 
upfront costs of VAT payments before receiving the 
refund. Also, the administrative burden of filing for 
VAT refunds can be complex and time-consuming, 
potentially discouraging compliance or leading to 
delays in refund processing, especially as there is 
no interest and/or penalty if the NRS cannot refund 
within the stipulated timeline. 
• Economic Development Tax Credit: The NTA 
provides a tax credit of 5% per annum for QCE 
acquired within 5 years from the production date. 
While this incentive is designed to encourage 
companies, the 5% tax credit may be perceived as 
insufficient. For instance, a QCE of ₦100million is 
entitled to a tax credit of only ₦5million (i.e. 5% of 
the QCE). This limited rate of relief may not provide 
a strong enough financial motivation, potentially 
discouraging investors. Consequently, companies 
may find the incentive less attractive compared to 
the PSI scheme which could impact the scale of 
investment in Nigeria. Consequently, Government 
may want to consider applying preferential tax rate 
to priority sector companies. The grant of tax holiday 
is no longer popular. Government may, therefore, 
consider a lower rate of between 20%-25% for such 
companies.
• Establishment of an Independent Fiscal 
Watchdog: It is high time that Nigeria established an 
independent fiscal watchdog that would be saddled 
with the responsibility of preparing analysis of the 
implications of proposed fiscal policy decisions, 
including projections for tax expenditure and 
savings from any proposed tax or incentive. This will 

© 2025 KPMG Advisory Services, a partnership registered in Nigeria and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a 
private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
The information contained herein is of a general nature and is not intended to address the circumstances of any particular  individual or entity. Although we endeavor to 
provide accurate and timely information, there can be no guarantee that such  information is accurate as of the date it is received or that it will continue to be accurate in 
the future. No one should act on  such information without appropriate professional advice after a thorough examination of the particular situation. 
© 2025 KPMG Advisory Services, a partnership registered in Nigeria and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of independent member firms affiliated with 
KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved. The KPMG name and logo are trademarks used under license by the 
independent member firms of the KPMG global organisation.
home.kpmg/ng
home.kpmg/socialmedia
For further enquiries, please contact:
Adewale Ajayi ng-fmtaxenquiries@ng.kpmg.com
increase transparency and accountability in fiscal 
policy making by providing an independent and 
objective analysis. The proposed watchdog should 
perform similar role as that of the Office for Budget 
Responsibility in the UK. Currently, the country 
does not provide any tax expenditure for proposed 
incentive though the Fiscal Responsibility Act 
specifically demands this. We also do not have any 
reliable estimate of how much a new tax will deliver 
to the coffers of government.  
• Transition Period for Commencement of the Act: 
It is likely that the President will assent to all the tax 
reform Bills in June given that the National Assembly 
has now harmonised the positions of the Senate 
and the House. The current Administration has 
consistently applied a 3-month transition window in 
the commencement of the Acts already introduced. 
We believe that this window is limited and will 
always result in disruptions to businesses given the 
pressure to adapt current systems and processes 
to comply with the revised tax laws. This urgency 
has, in many instances, resulted in compliance gaps 
and operational inefficiencies. It has also created 
unnecessary, but avoidable, disputes between tax 
authorities and taxpayers on the application of the 
provisions of the relevant laws.  
We, therefore, propose that the transition period for 
any new tax law be extended to one year to support 
a seamless implementation. This period will allow 
for a better understanding of the amended tax rules, 
timely updates to taxpayers’ accounting systems to 
reflect the changes, minimal disruption to business 
operations, and improved compliance. It will also 
align with global best practices adopted in leading 
economies. Specifically, for the Tax Reform Acts, we 
recommend a commencement date of 1 January 
2026.
Overall, the consolidation of all tax provisions into a 
single legislation is a step in the right direction. While 
some of the provisions have the potential to transform 
the economy, there are others, as highlighted above, 
that the government needs to revisit. Though the Act 
may not be a perfect one, it is a good way to start. It 
now boils down to implementation and enforcement 
of the provisions of the Act. However, in enforcing the 
provisions of the Act, the intention must be to enhance 
voluntary compliance. Consequently, tax authorities must 
strike a balance between enforcement and offering the 
required support and assistance to taxpayers. Tax laws 
must be enforced consistently and fairly while ensuring 
that penalties are proportional to non-compliance. With 
these, tax authorities will create a more positive taxpayer 
experience.